CHAPTER

7

Writing Style

CHAPTER GOALS

Copyright © 2001 ASM International®

All rights reserved.

www.asminternational.org

1. Understand the elements of style in technical writing

2. Become familiar with the style that is most suitable for

technical reports

WRITING STYLErefers to mannerisms in word usage. It is the way that

the writer consistently and unconsciously chooses words, forms sentences

and paragraphs, and combines them with ideas and thoughts to create a doc

ument. Style is all of the attributes described in “Criteria for Good Tech

nical Writing,” Chapter 6, plus the product of the writer’s persona, per

sonality, who he or she is and how they feel. A document is a composition

that integrates the elements of style into a finished work (Fig. 7.1). Like a

work of music, each composition is different because each person is dif

ferent. The work is a summation of technical knowledge combined with in

ner feelings and personal characteristics of the composer. This is the style

of the composer, who does some things in certain ways most of the time.

Style can be important because the audience (readers) may be influenced

by it. Style is usually what sells in the marketplace. Continuing with the

analogy of music composers, the great ones like Mozart, Vivaldi, and Han

del each had a style that set them apart from the millions of other musicians

who composed music. People like the styles of these composers, and the

listeners have become comfortable with particular styles by listening to cer

tain composers’ works for a very long time. Style makes a painter; style

makes a singer. Everybody has access to the words and music of every pub

lished song. What makes some singers’ renditions sell a million compact

discs? It is his or her style—the words, combined with the notes, combined

with the music, combined with the voice quality, combined with the voice

inflections, combined with the tempo. It is the total composition that sells.

108 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Fig. 7.1 Elements of style

Technical writing by definition is done for a reason. There is a purpose

and objective for every document. You want to achieve something by writ

ing this document. Writing style will help determine success in achieving

the goals of a document.

The author of a document determines the style. It is the purpose of this

Chapter to make the author aware of the factors that determine style so a

writing style that is successful with readers and congruent with accepted

technical writing practices can be developed. Chapter goals are addressed

by discussing the elements of style and by giving examples of different

writing styles. This Chapter then concludes with suggestions on develop

ing a style that works in technical writing.

7.1 Elements of Style

Figure 7.1 is an attempt to illustrate the many things that make up style.

Chapter 6, “Criteria for Good Technical Writing,” already discusses doc

ument content, presentation, and language skills, but style starts earlier. It

starts with writer choices of word usage, how words are put into sentences,

how paragraphs are constructed, and then how they are presented to read

ership in the final work. These early choices encompass a variety of ele

ments shown in Fig. 7.2.

Writing Style / 109

Fig. 7.2 Style is manifested in choice of words, sentences, and paragraphs.

Persona affects word choice and results in a particular style. If you are a

gregarious person, you may be prone to use words like “bold, hearty, beau

tiful.” An introverted person is likely to use words that do not draw atten

tion to himself or herself. Words like “anticipate, therefore, follows” may

be selected as a reflection of an introverted personality.

Likewise, writing style has a tone, which is a reflection of writer attitude

or feelings. If you are angry at your manager at the time of writing, this

may show in your writing as snipping remarks or angry words.

Angry Tone

The project would have been completed as scheduled if we had management co

operation.

110 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Angry Words

Noncommittal

Procrastination

Disappointing

Uncooperative

Unqualified

Sloppy

Nonconforming

Malicious

Shoddy

Technical writing, by definition, should be objective and impersonal. The

tone should be neutral. In other words, the tone should be dispassionate, im

partial, and unbiased. Tone may be influenced by your feelings at the time

of writing, how you feel about yourself, how you feel about your boss, com

pany, mate, or health. Readers do not want to be distracted by these subjec

tive connotations. If such a tone is evident, readers may question the objec

tivity of a work. [I can personally attest to the importance of tone in writing.

I had an unfortunate experience caused by my improper tone. Ten years ago,

we built a new house. It turned into a disaster. Everything went wrong. Af

ter we moved in, I vowed to write a book about our misadventure so that

others could avoid our mistakes. I spent a year writing the book, House From

Hell. Because nontechnical books are generally submitted to publishers

through an agent, I submitted a book proposal to 140 literary agents. Only

two agreed to read it; both turned me down as a client because of the tone

of the writing. One called the book sardonic; the other called it nasty. I was

still angry at the general contractor, the architect, the mason, the plasterer,

and the plumber, and it showed in my writing. One agent said that I would

frighten people out of building a custom-built house and nobody would buy

the book. I completely rewrote the book, but it is still unpublished. Tone can

definitely have a negative impact on writing style.]

RULE

Do not let personal feelings show in writing.

Word Choice

There are many types of words, and choice of words is a major part of

writing style. The average person born in the United States knows about

21,000 English (U.S. modified) words. [I was told this during a company

psychological test on word knowledge.] It takes about 500 words to fill a

single-spaced typed page. Technical documents can be less than one page

Writing Style / 111

or more than 100 pages. However, most technical journals limit submis

sions to about ten pages or 5,000 words. The author must make a decision

for each word included in a document.

Definition of some word categories can help define the concepts of good

word selection. For example, a person’s 21,000 word repertoire can be bro

ken down by grammatical function into four categories:

• Utility words like conjunctions (and, or, but, if, and so forth)

• Substance words for action (verbs) or subjects (nouns)

• Descriptive words that modify other words (adverbs, adjectives,

clauses)

• Contractions for people who do not have time to write out the real words

These basic categories are very general, but the usage of some types may

have more priority than usage of other word types. Substance words may

be more important than descriptive words, which are probably more im

portant than utility words.

Many words also have a “personality” of their own, just as words may

reflect the personality of the author. Figure 7.3 lists 15 categories of word

types with unique characteristics, as described below in more detail. This

TYPES OF WORDS

ClichÈ

Foreign

Gender

specific

Action

Archaic

Bottom line

Done deal

Far flung

Snug as a bug

Abbreviated

Et cetera

Ibid

Et al

Per se

Negative

His

Her

She

He

Technical

Produce

Change

Exceed

Organize

Slang

Albeit

Herewith

Hence

Hereafter

Euphemisms

Info

Lab

Dept

Sub

Long

Mistake

Oversight

Accident

Clumsy

Complex

Spectroscopy

Martensite

Fluoroscopy

Comminution

Uncommon

Hosed

Miffed

Hoot

Bummer

Technobabble

Passed away

Incident

Pre-owned

Marketer

Profanity

Predominant

Proximity

Ajudicate

(Well known)

Eventuality

Active

Phraseology

Diametrical

Incongruent

Pernicious

Passive

Proclivity

Unctuous

Abrogate

Ameliorate

Happy

Leverage

Boot

Strategize

Overarching

Sad

Meaningless/

misleading

Achieved

Finished

Built

Inspected

Was

Were

Has

Is

Joy

Health

Smile

Laugh

Death

Disease

Sickness

Cancer

Best

Highest

Unsurpassed

Excel

Fig. 7.3 Spectra of words available for technical writing

112 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Fig. 7.4 Word choices for technical writing

breakdown is useful, because some word types are inappropriate for tech

nical writing. It really is important not to use slang, cliches, “technobab

ble”, or uncommon, angry, and negative words.

Figure 7.4 is an illustration showing preferred types of words for technical

documents. There are few word types without a “do not use slash,” but do

not worry. There are enough active, technical, action, and positive words left

to meet even the largest writing task. Remember, you know 20,000 or more.

Cliches are essentially figures of speech. Groups of words are taken to

gether to have a contemporary meaning. They come and go in popularity.

Foreign words are also part of the English language, such as, restaurant

(French), pizza (Italian), envoy (French), soprano (Italian), and resumé

(French). There are many other examples. The foreign words listed in

Fig. 7.3 are Latin terms widely used in English writing. You, the author,

must decide if your readership will know their meanings:

• etc. et cetera and so forth

• Ibid ibidem in the same place (cited previously)

and others

Writing Style / 113

• et al.

• per se by itself

• i.e. id est that is

• e.g. exempli gratia for example

Words with a presumption of gender abound in the English language:

chairman, congressman, salesman, meter maid, repairman, and so forth.

These words suggest that only a man or a woman could do them, which is

often an anachronism. Nowadays, professional writers avoid words with any

arbitrary or presumptuous reference to a specific gender, religion, ethnic

group, or special group. All readers should be approached in an inclusive

manner without presumption of unnecessary distinctions. For example,

twenty years ago, form letters in business often had the salutation of “Dear

Sir.” This presumption of gender reflects poorly on the author and should

be avoided. Current salutations include “Dear Resident,” “Dear Subscriber,”

and “Dear Reader.” Salesperson is used in place of salesman. Chair is used

instead of chairman; meter monitor is used instead of meter maid.

Action words are meant to evoke or elicit feelings of excitement or

progress. It is commonplace in American business to develop vision and

mission statements for every department as well as the overall company.

The people who promote these exercises insist on using words of action in

developing these statements. Some words by nature have that connotation.

Race, fight, beat, and convert all imply action. When you use these words,

you describe something that happened, or you try to evoke action or ex

citement from the reader. Conversely, verbs that do not suggest as much

action are list, number, think, consider, study, and so forth. These words

are simply not as bold.

Archaic or old fashioned words can be used, but possibly only old

readers will know what they mean. Some biblical words like “thou shalt”

fit in the archaic category. [When I was a youth, all of the homes in the

neighborhood were heated with coal. There were many words associated

with coal furnaces that are probably unknown to people born after 1960.

The coal man (gender specific, then) delivered either anthracite or coke (if

you had a stoker) through a basement window into the coal bin. He (not he

or she) used a wheelbarrow to unload the coal from the truck and dumped

the coal down a coal chute. We had to stoke the fire several times a day,

and, in the winter, we put the ashes and cinders on the driveway and side

walks for traction. I suspect that many students in the second millennium

will not be familiar with terms such as coal man, stoke, cinders, anthracite,

and coal chute. They became archaic in only 50 or so years.]

Contemporary abbreviations of words are very commonplace in the

United States. They are not legitimate abbreviations but ones that simply

evolve. The abbreviations listed in Fig. 7.3 are familiar to most English

speaking people, but sometimes these shortened words are not generally

known. [I have noticed that public works departments have been using

shortened words on road signs, such as Niagara Coll, thru traffic, City

114 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Cent, and 50 MPH Min. I assume that Coll is short for college, thru for

through, cent for center, min for minimum, but I am not sure. These ab

breviations will not be found in most approved lists of abbreviations.]

Negative words such as those listed in Fig. 7.3, suggest something un

desirable, whether used as nouns, verbs, or modifiers. A mistake is almost

always undesirable. An “oversight” and an “accident” are similar to a “mis

take”; all imply a negative connotation. The last word on our negative word

list, clumsy, is almost name-calling. Many English words almost always

evoke negative reactions:

• Lazy

• Indolent

• Shiftless

• Ignorant

• Rude

• Crazy

• Loud

• Fat

• Boisterous

• Impolite

• Terse

• Dumb

Their use is usually avoided in technical writing.

Technical words are certainly to be expected in technical documents,

but there can be an overdose.

Too Many Technical Words

The analysis of the spectral frequency output of the Johannsen-type goniopho

tometer was accomplished by embedding algorithms in a derived linear regres

sion analysis computer program. Second order derivatives...

The technical words listed in Fig. 7.3 pertain to materials engineering,

but there is a list of parochial words for every technical field. You know

the ones in your field, but you may not know the ones used in other tech

nologies. A technical document may miss its mark if the reader is not fa

miliar with many of the words.

Slang abounds in our daily interactions with coworkers, service

providers, and even bosses. Words like “hosed,” “neat,” “cool,” and “bum

mer” have well-known meanings in the United States:

• Hosed means cheated.

• Neat means nice.

• Fine means attractive.

• Bummer means negative outcome.

They are used in most circles, but none of them read well in technical

writing.

Writing Style / 115

Slang in Technical Writing

We completed corrosion tests on eight types of cemented carbides. The cobalt

binder was varied from 6 to 14 percent and the effect of binder content on corro

sion rate was determined. Sample preparation was a bummer. Two grades of test

materials, the 6 percent and 8 percent cobalt grades, could not be polished to the

required surface roughness of 6 to 8 micros.

Euphemisms are words or phrases used in place of what really needs to

be said. In many cases, euphemisms are used to make things sound better.

For example, garbage collectors are called sanitation workers; it is more

genteel to say “where is the restroom?” than “where is the toilet?” Eu

phemisms also are very commonly used in industry in the United States.

Industrial euphemisms

Meaning

Strategic framework

Downsizing

Technology road maps

Operational excellence

Career enhancement

Development opportunity

Diagonal slice

Performance matrix

Shareholder satisfaction

Overarching goals

Plan

Layoff

Plan

Good work

More work

Problem

Opinions

To-do list

Quarterly results

Objective

The user usually intends to make something sound nicer or grander than

it is, but in reality the readers often miss the intended meaning or may be

annoyed with the unnecessary words. In all of the above instances, the eu

phemism requires extra length.

Euphemisms are also commonplace with computer technology, and per

sonal computers (PCs) have prompted almost a second language by as

signing specialized meanings to ordinary words.

Personal computing term

Meaning

Boot

Memory

Download

Upload

On-line

Crash

Program

Software

Hardware

Disk

Drive

Turn on the computer

Storage capacity

Transfer from another source

Transfer to others

Connected to other computers

Electrical problem

Operating instruction for a computer

Programs

Electrical equipment associated with personal computers

A data storage device

An electrical device to read magnetic media

Long words and complex words, the next two types in Fig. 7.3, often

conflict with the objective of concise writing. Good documents of any type

are concise, and the following words and phrases are examples of wordy

phrases and more concise alternatives:

116 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Concise replacement

Wordy phrase

And so as a result

Day to day routine

On the rise

On the basis of

Not withholding the fact that

Is knowledgeable about

It is evident that

It is important to note

Hence

Routine

Growing

Based on

But

Knows

Clearly

Note

Concision can also be applied to individual words.

Big word

Facilitate

Contact

Attempt

Additionally

Congregate

Significantly

Springtime

Therefore

Utilization

Concise replacement

Help

Call

Try

Also

Gather

Greatly

Spring

So

Use

Simpler, easier to read words can usually replace complex words like

those listed in Fig. 7.3, including “terms” for “phraseology,” “opposing”

for “incongruent,” and “harmful” for “pernicious.”

Uncommon words (such as proclivity, unctuous, abrogate, and ame

liorate) are not widely known and make reading more difficult. As men

tioned earlier, each English-speaking person knows a different quantity of

the 40,000 or so words in the English language. Many times, writers use

long, complex, and uncommon words to demonstrate intellectual author

ity. They may succeed at this but fail to make the point of the document.

Newspapers are a good example of a proper level of word usage. Most pro

fessional writers in the United States possess a 30,000 English vocabu

lary, but they write news articles using a 15,000 word vocabulary. They

write for a readership with educations ranging from grade school through

Ph.D. [I have yet to hear a Ph.D. complain that newspapers are written at

a level that is too simple. Simple writing is often the easiest reading.]

Technobabbleincludes manufactured words and phrases similar to some

industrial euphemisms. Every profession has words with special meanings,

but overuse of specialized terms or big words (strategize, overarching, de

liverable, and so forth) with simple meanings may only just obscure mean

ing and frustrate readers. These words have meaning within the profession,

but the meaning outside may be very different. This must be considered in

their use. Does your reader know what a deliverable is?

Profanity is, of course, totally unacceptable in any business or technical

document. In U.S. business and industry, there are very strict rules about

sexual harassment. Profane language often has sexual overtones that would

violate most sexual harassment guidelines. One off-color remark could cost

a person his or her job in spoken word or writing.

Writing Style / 117

Active and passive words involve the reader in very different ways. As

previously noted in Chapter 6, “Criteria for Good Technical Writing,” writ

ing in the active voice usually makes documents more readable. The active

voice is a good attribute in any form of writing, because writing in the ac

tive voice makes your statements more forceful. The active voice simply

means that the subject of the sentence does action. Passive voice, on the

other hand, does not identify who is doing the action:

Passive Voice

Samples of each candidate plastic were sectioned and mounted.

Active Voice

The metallurgical laboratory sectioned and mounted a sample of each candidate

plastic.

In the active voice, the reader knows who did the sectioning and mount

ing. Active voice generally requires the use of action verbs (like the ones

in Fig. 7.3), while passive verbs tend to give readers observations. This is

one reason why technical documents, which must present observational re

sults, often use passive verbs. The passive voice is unavoidable; just try to

eliminate passive verbs whenever you can. As shown in the following ex

amples, the indirect result of using the active voice is to make clear who is

doing the action.

Active Voice

• The Alpha Site Team achieved a tenfold improvement in knife life.

• The shop safety team finished instructing all employees on safe lifting practices.

• Cosgrove Construction Company built seven reinforced plastic storage tanks

for Nocal Chemical Corp.

• The NDE technician from the Materials Engineering Lab inspected three hypo

solution tanks in B-58.

Passive Voice

• A noticeable difference in quality was observed between U.S. and Canadian

products.

• Rehabilitation was discussed at the quarterly review meeting.

• Never has the subject of unionism been discussed.

• A production trial is scheduled for November 30.

Words that evoke happiness or sadness are two other categories listed

in Fig. 7.3. Feelings of happiness or sadness are not objectives in report writ

ing, but there may be occasions to use these kinds of words in business or

day-to-day communications. For example, managers may write a holiday

greeting to employees. Just keep in mind that some words can alter the mood

and morale of a reader.

118 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Meaningless or misleading words represent the final category of word

types in Fig. 7.3. Many well-used words in the English language do not pro

vide any meaningful information. For example, most superlatives (best,

greatest, superior, fastest, and so forth) are meaningless or misleading words

without factual foundation. These words (when you step back and think

about them) are often unsubstantiated claims. The author did not and could

not test every screwdriver in the world in order to claim that he or she sells

the best. Never claim product superiority without test data to support the

statement.

Not Credible

Cubic zirconia is superior to tool steel in wear and corrosion resistance.

Certainly the author did not test zirconia against all kinds of wear. It

would last only seconds in a gyratory rock crusher. Similarly, there may be

an environment that dissolves zirconia and not steel. The author has not

tested all environments. Therefore, this statement is meaningless and, at

the least, very misleading.

Words that cannot be backed with facts will lower the credibility of your

document. Superlatives generally represent unsupportable claims and thus

should be avoided in technical writing. Some other examples of meaning

less or very misleading words include:

• outstanding

• biggest

• ultimate

• optimize

• maximize

• cheapest

• farthest

• robust

• highest

• friendliest

• fastest

• lowest

If you ask, “What do these words mean?” the answer may be “nothing.”

Sentence Construction

Construction of good sentences follows directly from word choice. Build

sentences with concise, vigorous, and substantive words in the active voice.

Include valid facts and data. Suppress your inclination to use meaningless

and negative words, euphemisms, and abbreviations.

Writing Style / 119

What recommendations should you follow when forming sentences? In

a way, readers are like voters in a political election. They do not want neg

ative statements. Voters want to hear positive statements with substantive

recommendations for the future. This same strategy applies in technical

writing. Sentences need to be clear, concise, understandable, and based

upon positive words.

The basic rules of sentence formation are taught in school, but bad habits

often persist. Confusing clauses, slang, idioms, and errors in grammar or

punctuation are the common causes of poor sentence construction. This

section focuses on five poor “sentence habits” that commonly appear in

technical writing. Elimination of these unsound habits can improve con

struction of sentences.

[Opinion plays a role in writing style. By definition, persona is a key fac

tor in style. My suggestions on word use, sentence construction, and para

graphing are mostly based upon my experiences in reviewing the work of

others. I review technician and junior engineer reports daily, one or two

papers a month for technical journals, and periodically MS and Ph.D. the

ses and government research proposals. I am not picayune. I do not sub

stitute my words for those of others. I only make suggestions for concision,

clarity, and questionable facts. The following top-five sentence “problems”

are my opinion based on reviewing experiences. They are from my Pareto

chart. Others involved with technical writing may have another list, but we

both have the same objective—a document that the reader understands.]

Problem One: Starting with Dependent Clause. It is not grammati

cally wrong to start a sentence with a dependent clause, but the resulting

sentences often lack concision and are difficult to understand.

Starting with a Dependent Clause

At the start of the business year and at the beginning of the third quarter, the lab

oratory has a project review with the director of research.

The reader had to wade through 15 words to discover that you were talk

ing about the laboratory. Why not tell the reader up front?

Starting with a Noun

The laboratory has a project review with the director of research each January and

July.

The sentences in the preceding two examples have the same meaning,

but the latter is more clear and concise. The modifying phrase with the data

is still present, but it is easier to read when moved to the end of the sen

tence. Extra words were also removed to make the sentence more concise.

The remodeled sentence has 15 words, reduced from 26.

120 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

When a sentence starts with a dependent clause, another problem may be

confusion on what the clause refers to in the sentence.

Beginning with a Clause

Traveling to the western tank farm, he met three lab members near building 318.

Were the lab members traveling to the tank farm or was he? This is the

kind of confusion that often occurs when a dependent clause is moved away

from the word that it modifies.

Beginning with a Pronoun

He met three lab members on his way to the western tank farm. They were near

building 318.

This second version is clearer. Many times clarity can easily be improved

by breaking a long sentence into two or more sentences.

Starting sentences with clauses can be infectious. Some people do it on

almost every sentence. It produces an indirect tone. Every statement seems

to have a preamble. You can correct this bad habit by thinking about how

you start each sentence. Do you really need to start with a modifying clause,

or can you say what you want directly without qualifiers? If you can, then

do it. It helps the reader.

Problem Two: Subject and Verb Do Not Agree. As we all know, the

rules of English require agreement of subject and verb. If the subject is sin

gular, the verb must also be singular. Long sentences with many clauses

often create a significant physical separation of the subject and verb, and

this often leads to subject-verb disagreement.

Subject and Verb Do Not Agree

Metallography of failed balls and races are key aspects of failure analysis.

The subject, metallography, is singular, but the sentence uses a plural verb,

because the author has confused the modifying words “of balls and races”

as the subject. Even the grammar checks in word processing programs

sometimes miss this subtle mistake.

This type of mistake also occurs when an author makes the verb agree

with words that immediately precede it:

Subject and Verb Do Not Agree

The output of three wear testers, the block-on-ring, the ball-on-plane, and the mi

crotribometer are directed to a single computer.

Writing Style / 121

Agreement

The output of three wear testers, the block-on-ring, the ball-on-plane, and the mi

crotribometer is directed to a single computer.

The subject of this sentence is output, which is singular.

Quirks of the English language may also cause problems with subject

and verb agreement. For example “plural-sounding” words like series,

group, flock, gathering are really singular.

Agreement

A group of distinguished metallurgists is to convene for the selection process.

Other words (for example, none, some, all, or more) can be used prop

erly in either singular or plural form:

• All of the literature is complete.

• All were complete.

• Some of the literature has been delivered.

• Some are to be delivered.

In summary, watch for subject-verb agreement. It can be tricky. This mis

take is often noticed and can distract the reader from a message.

Problem Three: Incoherent Sentences. Sometimes during review of a

document, a sentence just does not make any sense. What is the author try

ing to say? Very often this occurs when writers are “on a roll” or in a

“stream of consciousness,” where their mind is going faster than their fin

gers can type. Parts of the next sentence get merged with the sentence in

progress. Sometimes a key word is inadvertently omitted.

Incoherent sentences usually result from the omission of a word.

Incoherent

The procedure for cutting circuit boards for failure study begins stripping the de

vices.

In this example, the writer left out “with” between begins and stripping.

Another example can be a missing verb.

Incoherent

Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) and thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) to

determine if any significant differences existed between the samples identified as

A and D.

122 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

It appears that a “were used” or “were employed” was intended after TGA.

Incoherent sentences may also occur when two sentences are inadver

tantly merged:

Incoherent

It is typical for polypropylene-polyethylene blends to have a melt flow index and

the past processing cooling on a mandrel reduces distortion.

Whatever the cause, incoherent sentences can easily be prevented by hav

ing peer review of every document.

Problem Four: Same-Sounding Word and Wrong Usage. A signifi

cant number of English words have the same pronounciation but very dif

ferent meanings, such as:

• Two, to, and too

• Coarse and course

• Principal and principle

• Loose and lose

• Plane and plain

• Their and there

• See and sea

• Affect and effect

• Brake and break

The words in the preceding list are frequently misused. The root cause

can be reliance on only computer spelling checking applications. Some

times grammar checkers can pick up misuse, but even here, programming

misses some quirks of the English language. The machines do not know

what the writer is trying to say, and they often cannot detect misuse of

words in technical phrases.

The following is an example of a document that made it through a spelling

checker with just about every word misused:

The problem width a spell checker

Eye wood like to show that spell check hers will knot all ways fined words that

are used inn correctly. The rite spelling is only pro deuced by reeding the work

over and by watching for words with multi pull spellings. All duel spellings caught

bye soft wear cannot be assummed.

The solution to this problem is to reread your work after using the spelling

checker.

Problem Five: Sentences Containing Slang or Idioms. Slang is never

proper in writing. The readers may assume that the writer does not know

the proper terms and question author credibility. Slang and idioms are

particularly inappropriate in communications. Readers who have English

Writing Style / 123

as a second language may not be familiar with slang or idiomatic expres

sions and may completely misinterpret your document.

Use of an Idiomatic Expression

The rejection rate is higher than normal for the delta station chassis that we have

received from France. Please get on top of the situation.

A French-speaking person may have no idea what is meant by “get on top

of the situation.” Similarly, that person may not recognize slang words.

Use of Slang

The transport roller bearings were hammered. There was reddish goop coming out

of the seal. We decided that this baby had to go, and we served up a new issue.

Translation

The transport bearing failed. Wear debris was apparent in the seal area, and a de

cision was made to replace it.

Summary. In summary of this section, sentences need to be clear, con

cise, understandable, and based on positive words. Keep in mind some of

the examples of common sentence problems. A writing style should use

sentences free of clauses that can confuse, slang, idioms, and errors in gram

mar or punctuation. These mistakes can easily be prevented by acquiring

peer review of every document.

Paragraphs

Paragraphs make reading easier by breaking a document into pieces. It

would be difficult to read any document without paragraphs, as the human

eye and brain need to recognize when an author finishes one thought and

moves to another. Reading a book without paragraphs would be compara

ble to eating an eight-ounce steak without cutting it. A paragraph break (de

noted by an indentation or skipped line of text) provides a necessary sig

nal that a new thought, idea, or piece of information is coming.

Paragraphs are essential in good writing, and most people take paragraphs

for granted. Good paragraphs are unnoticeable. We have always read in

paragraphs; everything is broken into paragraphs in newspapers, books,

and letters. Good paragraphs are inconspicuous, because they just make

reading easier by grouping related sentences together. This basic objective

depends on the choice of paragraph content and length.

Paragraph Content. The key part of any paragraph is its topic sentence.

Paragraphs must have a topic sentence, which is supported by the other sen

tences in the paragraph. Most often, the paragraph begins with the topic

124 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

sentence. It continues with supporting sentences and then ends with some

form of thesis restatement and a transition to the next paragraph.

For technical documents, the purpose of a paragraph is either to persuade

or to share information. These purposes lend themselves to specific strate

gies for development of paragraph contents. To persuade someone of some

thing, first assert what you want the readers to think or do. This is done

with a topic sentence.

RULE

Every paragraph must have a topic sentence.

This is the topic sentence for the next section, where the purpose is to

persuade you about the importance of paragraph length. In the next step,

the paragraph is built with examples and arguments that convince readers

of the importance and validity of the topic sentence. Readers may be per

suaded in many ways, and so a strategy or plan is needed. Besides exam

ples of long and short paragraphs, one could try to make paragraphs the

right length by listing grammar rules on paragraphs. Another persuasion

technique is the use of analogies (like the steak one).

Most persuasion strategies involve a presentation that progresses from

general to specific statements. Start with your topic sentence and some gen

eral related sentences. Then, move on to specific examples, facts, argu

ments—whatever it takes to make the point. End the paragraph by restat

ing the topic sentence in a modified form. This is the classic approach: tell

them what you want to say, say it, and tell them what you said.

The strategy for information sharing is similar. You are not sharing in

formation without reason. Publishing a paper in a public journal is the ul

timate example of sharing, but the work is out there for all to criticize.

Therefore, your purpose is to be convincing as well. In writing a trip re

port, where one simply describes what he or she saw at the Atlas Welding

Company, intentionally or not, the writer’s words are producing a reader

result. The reader forms a favorable or unfavorable opinion of Atlas Weld

ing, depending on writing style. The writer ends up persuading the reader.

RULE

Paragraphs contain a complete thought.

Paragraph Length. As pointed out in the previous section, paragraphs

need to be the right length. Is the correct length one sentence, ten sentences,

250 words, or 500 words? Unfortunately (for us engineers who like to think

by the numbers), there is no numerical rule on the number of sentences or

words in a paragraph. If a complete thought can be expressed in one sen

tence, and if that is all that you want the reader to know, then a paragraph

can be one sentence.

Writing Style / 125

One Sentence Paragraph

In developing this standard, other standard recommended practices from some of

the largest manufacturers (Polk, LTC, and Toledo Gear) of gear reducers were com

piled along with Tribology’s knowledge of company applications to determine a

common procedure that would encompass the vast majority of gear reducers in

the company.

[This paragraph has other problems, but it was still published in a com

pany newsletter.]

On the other extreme, a paragraph that goes on for several pages is very

difficult to swallow and digest. A page or screen full of words just does not

look right. Long paragraphs often reflect poorly on the author as a “wind

bag,” which is a likely perception of readers subjected to an uninterrupted

page of words. [I would never even consider reading any document that

contained even one page without paragraph breaks. This is a personality

fault. It was probably brought on by having to read Milton’s “Paradise Lost”

in a high school English course. Boring!] Some people never stop talking.

Those are the people who write long paragraphs.

One rule of thumb for paragraph length is that good paragraphs are vi

sually appealing with easily discernible and meaningful paragraph breaks

on each page. Each page (or a screen view) needs at least one paragraph

break, but more than three may be too many. This is about the extent of any

numerical rule on the length of paragraphs, but it can help in identifying

places where writing can be improved.

If a complete thought takes more than a full screen or printed page of words,

then alter writing strategy to yield more bit-sized arguments. If you come up

with “too small paragraphs,” the same is recommended. Change your writing

strategy to add more support to the thesis. One-sentence paragraphs are ac

ceptable, but that should be all that needs to be said. As you adjust your writ

ing strategy, strive to keep a balanced flow of paragraph breaks. The breaks

just have to coincide with the “complete thought” rule. Each paragraph con

tains related sentences, an ending, and a transition that do not go on forever.

RULE

Paragraph length needs to be just right; just give enough information for a

thorough discussion of the topic sentence.

Another writing concept that may help determine the length of paragraphs

is the idea of parallel construction for lists. When authors make lists, each

item in the list is treated in the same way as the other list items. For exam

ple, if the first item in a list begins with an adjective, then all the items in

the list should begin with an adjective. If the first item is expressed in one

sentence, then all the items in the list should be expressed in one sentence,

if possible. This is the idea of parallel construction for lists. An example of

126 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

this is the list of “Chapter Goals” at the beginning of each chapter in this book.

These lists have parallel construction, as each list item begins with a verb.

The concept of parallel construction can also help one shape the length

of paragraphs. Just think of all paragraphs as a list of thoughts or topic sen

tences. Like any list, you want a balanced presentation of each item. If you

treat each topic sentence as parallel ideas with roughly the same amount of

support, then you can achieve a good balance of paragraph length. Obvi

ously some paragraphs may be more important than others. However, this

does not mean they have to be longer.

The headings in a document are also useful tools in shaping paragraphs.

Important paragraphs should be appropriately placed in your heading hi

erarchy. Important ideas do not require long paragraphs; they do deserve

prominent positioning in heading structure. Likewise, a series of less

important but parallel topics can be broken down by headings. Good use

of headings is thus another way to achieve an even balance and flow of

paragraph breaks in documents.

Summary of the Elements in Style

Writing style is like personal lifestyles. Everybody is different in the use

of words, sentences, and paragraphs. However, technical writing requires

a style different from creative writing. It requires a style that conveys in

formation rather than art.

Words must be chosen carefully. There are many types of words avail

able to the technical writer, but only particular types of words should be

used (active, factual, positive, and so forth). Be very aware of tone. Per

sonal feelings (biases) can be determined from word choice.

Sentences and paragraphs also need good structure, length, and focus.

Sentences should be concise and direct statements with a complete thought.

All paragraphs need a topic sentence that is supported by the other sen

tences in the paragraph. These are just some of the elements of style. Other

elements are described in subsequent Chapters.

7.2 Examples of Writing Styles

The writing style of an author often becomes apparent the second time that

you read something by the author. Mannerisms become apparent. A formal

style of technical writing by an accomplished author looks like the following:

Formal Technical Writing Style (P.J. Blau, Friction Science and Technology,

Marcel Dekker Inc., 1995, p 204, used with permission)

The process of lubrication is one of supporting the contact pressure between op

posing surfaces, helping to separate them, and at the same time, reducing the slid

Writing Style / 127

ing or rolling resistance in the interface. There are several ways to accomplish this.

One way is to create in the gap between the bodies geometric conditions that pro

duce a fluid pressure sufficient to prevent the opposing asperities from touching

while still permitting shear to be fully accommodated within the fluid. That method

relies on fluid mechanics and modifications of the lubricant chemistry to tailor the

liquid’s properties—especially its viscosity and the dependence of viscosity on

temperature and pressure ...

This style is impersonal. It presents facts, and it uses enumeration in the

paragraph to make a point. There are no personal pronouns, slang, idioms,

or any of the “less-preferred” words. The grammar may not meet every En

glish teacher’s expectations, but the message is clear. This example mir

rors a basic lesson advocated in this book: a clear message should be your

goal. Strive for perfection, but do not make pursuit of good grammar the

primary goal. Reasonable grammar, which obeys the rules of English, is

adequate when your primary goal is the clarity of content.

Technical documents can have a less formal style than the previous ex

ample. Reports to peers or within a department may have a more informal

style with some limited use of personal pronouns:

Informal Style

The Materials Engineering Laboratory has an on-going program to promote the use

of ceramics and cermets for tools subject to corrosion. A limitation of the use of

most ceramics is their inability to be machined in the sintered state. There are

some ceramics that have been modified by addition of a conductive phase (like

graphite) to allow electrical discharge machining, but to-date, these additions have

had a detrimental effect on mechanical properties.

It is the purpose of this report to present experimental results on machining of zir

conia with conventional machine tools. We attempted milling with diamond

coated cemented carbide end mills. We will show surface finish and dimensional

results in machining dies for edge trimming of polyester film support.

A descriptive style pertains to documents that need to explain something.

The document may be an instruction manual or a report that explains a

process or a design concept. These types of descriptive documents can be

written in different ways depending on author style. For example, a de

scription in the active voice has a different connotation than the passive

voice:

Active voice

Put the oil indicator into the sump and connect it to the data logger.

Passive voice

The oil indicator is put into the sump and connected to the data logger.

It is probably apparent at this point that this description needs an illus

tration. How does one slide a paper clip on-end down a plane? A sketch

and a list of key parts would clarify things.

Description (continued)

As shown in Fig. 7.5, the paper clip is cut so that one loop extends about 0.5 inches

from an acrylic sheet that is cut in a “U” shape with the paper clip at the valley of

the “U.” The “U” is inserted, and it straddles the plane that holds the film to be

The statement in the active voice is written as an imperative. It is telling

you to do it like this.

In general, machine or process descriptions first explain the purpose of

the device or process, the way it is used, and any essential background in

formation on its importance. Reasons for the reader to continue or put the

document aside are given. The overall size or dimensions of the device or

the operating specifications and capabilities of a process are explained or

described. Next component parts may be listed—what they look like and

what they do. Then how the parts are put together and how they work as a

unit are described.

128/ Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Paper clip

Descriptive Writing

The paper-clip friction tester has been used since 1987 to measure the presence

of wax on photographic films. It is basically an inclined-plane friction tester like

those used in high school physics labs. In this version, a strip of film (usually 35mm

wide) is fastened with clips to the plane that is raised to produce motion of a rider.

The rider is the radiused end of a paper clip. The end of the paper clip is placed

on the web (vertically with its flatwise plane aligned with the long axis of the in

clined plane). The plane is hinged at one end and the free end is raised until the

rider motion is produced. The tangent of the angle of inclination of the plane when

the paper clip starts to slide is the static coefficient of friction.

Fig. 7.5 Schematic of paper clip test

Writing Style / 129

tested. The dimensions of all components and the placement of the inclined plane

hinge are given in diagram A.

The details of the test procedure and reporting of data are available in the ASTM

G 164 Standard Test Method. The output of the test is the breakaway friction co

efficient, which, in turn, will indicate if wax or another lubricant is present. If the

value is less than 0.2, a lubricant is present.

It would take considerably more text to completely describe this device

in words. The sketch probably saves three pages. This example illustrates

the value of graphics in descriptive writing.

Some technical writing is done strictly to inform. There is no subliminal

message, no attempt to persuade the reader. The goal is simply to inform

on a subject that may be of general interest. Professionally written pieces

in technical magazines often use this style.

Informational Technical Writing (Steel, Material for the 21st Century, Advanced

Materials & Processes, ASM International, Jan 1996, p 29, used with permission)

In spite of inroads by a range of competing materials, steel is still the primary struc

tural material because of its outstanding strength, ductility, fracture toughness, re

pairability, and recyclability. Over the past ten years, advances in steelmaking and

processing technologies have enabled the development of a wide range of new

steel products with improved properties. For example, combinations of closely

controlled chemical composition, rolling practices, and cooling rates now permit

the production of steels with enhanced fracture toughness and lower susceptibil

ity to hydrogen cracking.

The expanded use of vacuum degassing, ladle treatment, and continuous casting

has led to the introduction of ultra-formable steels for complex automotive parts

and has provided improved electrical steels for the electric motor and transformer

industries. The higher ductility of extra-deep-drawing steels has allowed auto de

signers to consolidate parts. At the same time, stamping reliability has been im

proved, as demonstrated by lower rates of breakage and splitting.

Improved cleanliness in bar products has led to longer fatigue life and opportuni

ties for bearing downsizing. The expanded use of ladle treatment has also allowed

the development of superior seamless pipe grades with improved toughness

through closer control of composition.

Eloquent use of words, proper grammar, proper structure, tone, and pre

sentation usually typify professional technical writing. Professionalism

shows through. These articles also tend to be shallow in the technical as

pects of what they concern. This is intentional. They are writing to a broad

readership. [Most of us practicing engineers can only aspire to this style of

writing. It is a talent, and they have more than many of us. However, hav

ing a lesser command of language should not discourage you. Remember

that technical writing is predominately task oriented. You can still obtain

your writing objectives with ordinary language skills by following our tech

nical writing suggestions for ordinary technical professionals.]

130 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

A style of writing common among academicians is referenced writing.

The author cites a reference every few sentences. The work of others needs

to be acknowledged, but too many references can make the reader think

that the writer has no personal knowledge of the subject and he or she is

simply parroting others.

Referenced Writing Style

Attempts at lubricant pressurization have been repeatedly made. Direct supply to

the tool interface was abandoned because the orifice became blocked with detri

tus [57]. Milford [58] proposed a powdered metal compact die through which oil

could be forced. The concept of supplying oil through radial holes in a die was

first proposed by Turner [59].

The author’s intentions are noble; he or she wants to be thorough. Some

readers prefer this writing style. Others [moi] are distracted by frequent in

terruptions to say what others have done. It is not necessary to cite every

thing ever written about a subject; it is appropriate to cite papers that sup

port or challenge a thesis. References to the work of others should be

included in background information and in discussing results. The re

mainder of the paper should be the author’s words, not the words of oth

ers. In books, some authors do reference writing; others provide general

references that readers can use if they want more information. Neither is

wrong. They are different styles.

Another often-used style of technical writing is “mathematical” writing.

The object of some research is to derive a model that can be used to pre

dict some phenomenon. The article consists mostly of derivations and math

ematical computations. Of course, mathematics, physics, and chemistry

tests and textbooks are heavy in mathematical writing, but often the in

structor helps students and provides ample time to digest derivations and

models. Most journal readers do not have the time to wade through math

ematical writing.

Mathematical Writing

For the stated conditions, monotonic plastic deformation occurs and equation 8

applies.

H Q PR P

Y(P2

Q2)(1 P2)

This equation can be further simplified. Assuming P

H Q1

A2 A1

(10)

A1B and R

(A2

1

A2

2 )(1

P2)

A2 Y

The coefficients A1 and A2 can be obtained from equation 11. And so on...

Writing Style / 131

The writing style in the mathematical example only conveys a message

to those who have the interest and time to follow the mathematics. If this

is the goal, then let this be the style. If you wish to convey a message to a

larger readership, limit the math and explain the thesis in words and illus

trations.

On the other extreme, some technical documents are written in a con

versational style. They are written like you would talk to a coworker.

Conversational Writing

I made forty microhardness indentations in the coated surface and gave the results

to John Jackson for profilometer tracing. He traced them after lunch, and I got them

back. Next, I cut the bar with my abrasive cutoff saw so that I could fit the sam

ples in the SEM. Pete Fong said that he would do the job as soon as a hole opens

in his schedule.

A conversational style is inappropriate for most technical documents. It

reads awkwardly. The words used to communicate with coworkers sound

fine because of accents and intonations that occur in speaking but do not

read well. For example, you may say to your officemate, “I found the an

swer to shaft failure on the photomics I took.” Stated properly in a report

this becomes, “Metallographic examination of the shaft failure indicated

that the failure was caused by low cycle bending fatigue.” It is acceptable

to be somewhat informal in writing, but do not write like you talk.

RULE

Do not write like you talk.

The final example of style is shallow writing. It is characterized by un

substantiated statements and must be avoided at all times.

Shallow Writing

Polycrystalline zirconia is outstanding in wear applications. It is widely used in all

industries. It is harder than steels and has low friction. It is also very corrosion re

sistant and will not rust like metals. It is proposed that this material be used to re

place all machine parts that wear out. We can set up a zirconia manufacturing

operation to supply the parts.

The author sounds like a used car salesperson. The use of superlatives

like outstanding, widely, very highest, superior, fastest, and cheapest im

mediately raise a flag. These terms cannot be substantiated. This type of

writing is the extreme opposite to referenced writing. When making a state

ment that something is harder or more resistant, present facts to support the

claim. The style of writing in the above example will probably have low

credibility.

132 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Summary. Examples for eight styles of technical writing illustrate how

a particular style is manifested in words. There are as many styles of tech

nical writing as there are people writing. Each person writes differently.

However, as shown by these examples, style has an effect on the reader.

Just as you reacted differently to these examples, so will your readers. Use

a style that will appeal to the intended readership.

7.3 Recommended Style

How should you write? What styles should you try to have? For good or

bad, your style is somewhat predetermined by your persona—who you are,

your personality, characteristics, likes, and dislikes. Previous sections de

scribe the key elements of style: word choice, sentence and paragraph con

struction, and examples of different styles in technical writing.

The purpose of this section is to recommend a writing style consistent

with the best practices for technical writing. [The term “best practices” is

used in U.S. industry for what most people think is the way things should

be done to get good results. Pardon the euphemism, but in this case it aids

concision.] First the attributes of technical writing (summarized from dis

cussions in Chapter 1, “What Is Technical Writing?”) are described briefly,

and then suggestions are given for some of the major components of style:

content, presentation, format, and language skills.

Attributes of Technical Writing—Again. Technical writing style per

tains to technical subjects. No need to use technical writing style in an

e-mail to grandmother. Your writing should have a purpose and objective.

Decide on both. What is your purpose? What is your objective? The pur

pose is what you hope to achieve with your technical document. The ob

jective is the overall goal of the body of work. Style should be such that

one conveys information in the form of test results, statistics, budget num

bers, and so forth—facts. This is a key aspect of technical writing. Saying

that you improved the slitting operation is insufficient. You should state

that tool life has increased from one to twelve weeks and then calculate the

savings.

Readers appreciate quantitative information. Technical writing is imper

sonal. You should not thank Henry Washiski for his help in completing

your heat treating experiments. There are special places for this type of ac

knowledgment; these places are not in the text. Technical writing is con

cise. Every word and sentence is scrutinized to determine if each adds value

to the document. If not, delete it; be brutal. Technical writing style is di

rected at a particular readership. Write to somebody. Determine who your

priority readers are and write to them. Adjust the technical level to suit

them. Technical writing is archival. The document should be written in such

a manner for archiving and possible use five or ten years from when you

wrote it. Finally, when you refer to the work of others, use appropriate at

tribution.

Writing Style / 133

In summary, as stated in Chapter 1, “What Is Technical Writing,” tech

nical writing has certain attributes, and your writing style should give your

readers technical documents with these attributes.

Content. The content of a technical document should warrant sharing.

It should have some technical value with meaningful information. If you

send out a technical document on a new piece of equipment that you saw

demonstrated [but have a zero chance of buying], you may earn yourself

the reputation as a purveyor of trite. Only write technical documents on

matters that need to be shared, that have value in retaining, and that will

produce some tangible savings or benefit to your employer. If you develop

an innovative etching process for stainless steels, there may be no company

value in sharing this information if your department is the only company

unit that would ever use this process.

A technical report on a new chemical process that you developed may be

suitable for sharing with others. What kinds of information/data should be

included? Include only what is necessary to meet the purpose and objec

tive of the document. Do not include details of every blend alloy encoun

tered. Only report on things that matter, things that would produce value if

shared. If you are a researcher writing about significant work that you com

pleted, give sufficient details so that the work can be reproduced by others.

A researcher may challenge your thesis and want to do what you did and

see if the same results are obtained.

RULE

Be concise, but be complete, too.

Presentation (Format). Preferred formats have already been mentioned

for various technical documents, but their importance is worth repeating.

Format is an integral part of writing style, and Fig. 7.6 illustrates recom

mended formats for informal reports, formal reports, and papers. All tech

nical reports need the same elements.

• Introduction

• Body

• Conclusion

• Recommendations

Informal reports can be one page followed by supporting data in graphs or

photographs. Formal reports do not need to be very long, but they should

have an abstract. Papers require an abstract and distinct requirements in the

introduction, body, and ending matter.

Most engineering projects require the preparation of a formal report, and

so subsequent Chapters focus on the preparation of formal reports. At this

point, the main intention is to convince you, as an author, that your report

should follow the proposed formats (unless there is a mandate from some

higher authority or some other compelling reason).

134 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

Fig. 7.6 Typical formats for various types of technical reports

[One of the reasons for writing this book is my frustration with unin

telligible reports from coworkers. In the 1990s, large companies contin

ually experimented with various organizational schemes to improve prof

its. We now have teams for everything. I work with team members from

at least a dozen different divisions. Each person is performing assign

ments, mostly laboratory experiments, and we report to each other in pe

riodic reports. Some reports have the format of an abstract, conclusions,

graphs without captions, and assorted spreadsheets. The conclusions are

not really conclusions. What is written under the conclusions heading is

really discussion.

Another uses a different format: title, experiment name, purpose of ex

periment, list of variables, and levels for this experiment, list of responses

for this experiment, summary of findings, and statistical program graphic

output (several pages) with no captions and only an acronym title. The text

Writing Style / 135

under all six headings is usually less than one-half page. Yet another per

son uses another format: title, experiment name, contributors, data, ex

periment, purpose, objectives, experiment design, process conditions, test

results, data summary, conclusion, path forward, graphs and photographs

with no captions.

There is no consistency in reporting. Many documents also have little

value, because they are not properly written and data are not adequately

identified. Essentially, we are spending millions in research and develop

ment, sometimes without adequate documentation.]

Many engineers, researchers, and managers write reports without an es

tablished format. There is no consistency; important details are omitted.

The net effect is poor communication. The recommended formats of tech

nical reports (Fig. 7.6) are proposed as an effective way to instill some qual

ity control in report writing. Avoid illogical formats, tomes, micro-reports

with too few words, and “theatrical reports” with overwhelming section

headings (bold, 18 point, underlined, and italicized).

RULE

Use accepted formats for report writing.

Standard formats are essential, and the format of the formal report has

been accepted worldwide by the international technical community. It is

even duplicated as templates in many word processing programs. You sim

ply put words into the standard section heads dictated by the software. Most

programs use the standard format similar to the one advocated here.

Language Skills. Make every effort to follow accepted rules of language.

Spelling and punctuation must be correct. Grammar should be reasonable

if clear communication is the goal, but make every effort to eliminate com

mon mistakes and repetitive errors in grammar. Choose words and con

struct sentences so that ideas are unambiguous. Try to use the active voice,

and avoid jargon or phrases that are unfamiliar or inappropriate for read

ers. Write to readers at a level meant for the intended readers.

Do not mix thoughts and write complex sentences. The length of para

graphs should be balanced with convincing support of the topic sentence

in each paragraph. Conclude sections with transitions to the next section.

Make sure there is continuity of ideas and coherence throughout the text.

Summary

Writing style is a reflection of your personality, but technical writing re

quires a style that achieves the attributes of good technical documents. Use

a standard report format as a basic skeleton, and organize thoughts and in

formation into a series of balanced paragraphs with clear and concise topic

sentences. Do not make the reader wonder where you are going. Make the

136 / Engineers’ Guide to Technical Writing

content something that the readership wants to know. Make sure sentences

are clear, and be extremely careful of tone. Do not let feelings or mood

show through your writing. Finally, have a trusted person read your work

to make sure that your content, presentation, language skills, and style meet

expectations.

In summary, the following concepts reflect the style requirements of good

technical writing:

• Use an accepted report format.

• Choose concise words.

• Be unbiased and maintain a neutral, objective tone.

• Construct clear sentences of mixed length.

• Develop a balanced flow of paragraphs with clear and concise topic

sentences.

• Avoid the use of unfamiliar technical words.

• Avoid acronyms. Many readers may not know what they mean.

• Use an impersonal style, especially for formal reports or papers.

• Adopt a positive style of writing, and write in the active voice.

• Avoid euphemisms and words with contemporary meanings that are

different from dictionary meanings.

• Write with credibility; avoid the use of superlatives like superior,

fastest, and so forth that are often just unsupported exaggerations.

• Avoid conversational writing in technical reports.

• Adopt the concept of parallel construction when listing items or shap

ing the length and content of many paragraphs

• Use topic headings to help organize and prioritize the flow of para

graphs.

Important Terms

• Tone

• Passive

• General to specific

• Enumeration

• Style

• Euphemism

• Superlatives

• Analogy

• Format

• Conversational

For Practice

• Credibility

• Coherence

• Impersonal

• Jargon

• Word choice

• Cause and effect

• Active

• Technobabble

• Tome

• Persuasive

1. Define writing style and explain why it is important.

2. List the personality traits that you think show in your writing. Are there

any that would have a negative effect on technical writing?

3. What is the difference between style and tone? Why are they important?

Writing Style / 137

4. Analyze the writing style in a newspaper front-page story. What tense

is used?

5. What is wrong with euphemisms?

6. Write a procedure for changing an automobile tire. Review it for use

of undesirable words (slang, euphemisms, passive words, and so forth),

and correct them.

7. Write a paragraph on a recent vacation. Now edit it to be more concise.

8. State five negative words and five positive words.

9. Write a paragraph with an angry tone. Now rewrite it so it is imper

sonal and objective (no tone).

10. Write a paragraph in the passive voice. Convert it to the active voice

and compare the two from the readers’ viewpoint.

11. What is meant by parallel construction?

To Dig Deeper

• D. Beer and D. McMurrey, A Guide to Writing as an Engineer, John

Wiley & Sons, 1997

• R.H. Fiske, Dictionary of Concise Writing, Writers Digest Books,

Cincinnati, OH, 1996

• D. Jones, Technical Writing Style, Allyn and Bacon, Boston, 1998

• P. Ruben, Ed., Science and Technical Writing: A Manual of Style,

Henry Holt and Company Inc., New York, 1992

• W. Strunk, Jr. and E.B. White, The Elements of Style, 3rd ed., Allyn

and Bacon, Boston, 1979